Preamble

Perfumemaking is one of the most powerful art forms, but its secrets are closely held by a privileged few. The industry prizes perfumers with elite pedigrees, which often prevents marginalized perfumers from joining mainstream perfumeries. The industry also perpetuates exclusionary practices, from exoticizing non-Western cultures to erasing “noses” who develop perfumes, that push marginalized perfumers into self-taught and niche practices. There is another problem: intellectual property (IP). Names. Notes. Formulas. Odors. Colors. These parts of perfumes are protectable by a panoply of IP rights. In other fields, artists can innovate through imitation. But the IP thicket surrounding perfume is so dense that aspiring perfumers cannot easily “sample” fragrances. Instead, scents are left to be locked up and even lost. The free culture movement addressed similar problems in hardware and information by championing creativity without IP, but the perfume industry has remained largely untouched. Perfumery is overdue for a transformation, and one is emerging: open source perfume.

Pitch

As Open Source Smell Culture co-founder Saskia Brown-Wilson put it, ““[w]hat you might refer to as ‘sampling culture’ in music, for example, doesn’t exist in the world of scent. I know a lot of people who got in trouble this way. I think that sampling is important and necessary because it allows people to build on each other’s creativity. It allows us to learn from each other.” The CAT Lab concurs, and we’re here to teach you fragrance fundamentals so you can create our recipes and craft your own.

PreparationFor safety and supplies, Art and Olfaction’s fantastic open source perfume primer is an absolute must.

Pure full-strength materials can be diluted in solvents for efficiency, economics, and ease: it’s cheap and simple to work with resulting dilutions. The CAT Lab’s preferred solvent is DPG, also known as perfumer’s alcohol. Purchase Art and Olfaction’s recommended supplies, along with DPG and the materials identified below, before getting started.

Process

Reviewing Primer. Take another look at Art and Olfaction’s perfume primer, particularly the parts about safety.

Diluting Materials. Using clean pipettes, dilute each of your materials to a ratio of 10% material to 90% DPG. (Ten drops of material to ninety drops of DPG does the trick.) Confirm the composition of each material before diluting, as some are already diluted.

Combining Materials. Line up the 10% dilutions you need for World Wide Web. Using each vial’s dropper or a clean pipette, combine the dilutions to create an accord. (The recipe can be scaled up to create bigger batches.) Play with the proportions of World Wide Web to discover what suits your preferences and body chemistry.

Learning More. If you’re even more curious about the perfumemaking process, consider taking this Atlas Obscura class with Saskia Wilson-Brown herself. (That’s how we got started!)

Perfumes

CAT Lab’s open source perfumes are genderless, wearable, and low-sillage scents, meaning that you can smell it on your skin without it overwhelming the space or people around you. The Lab has launched two open perfumes: World Wide Web and Search Engine.

BANNED BOOKS

“Eight little scents and eau-de-Cologne were laid in little taps over the wash-basin,” wrote Aldous Huxley, “[Lenina] turned on the third from the left, dabbed herself with chypre, and, carrying her shoes and stockings in her hand, went out to see if one of the vibro-vacuum machines were free.”While Huxley alludes elsewhere that the vibro-vacuum machines are explicit, he does not explain that chypre is a classic perfume style. Banned Books riffs on the chypre accord, which is characterized by citrusy bergamot, musky patchouli, and earthy oakmoss. Combined, Banned Books is a fresh, foresty fragrance.

Sample Banned Books to imagine the world you’d like to see.

Top Note

Bergamot x 3 drops of 10% dilution - $3.50/4ml

Base Notes

Patchouli (Dark) Indonesia x 2 drops of 10% dilution - $3.00/4ml

Labdanum Clear Absolute P&N x 2 drops of 10% dilution - $4.50/4ml

Oakmoss Absolute 10% x 2 drops - $3.00/4ml

Civette Synthetic (Firmenich) x 2 drops of 10% dilution - $8.25/4ml

Total Cost: $22.25 for multiple batches
